.TH MKDOTENV 1 "September 2025" "mkdotenv 0.4.2"
.SH NAME
mkdotenv \- A command-line tool to add or update environment variables in a .env file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mkdotenv
[\fI--help\fR | \fI-h\fR] 
[\fI--version\fR | \fI-v\fR] 
\fI--variable-name\fR <\fIVARIABLE_NAME\fR> \fI--variable-value\fR <\fIVARIABLE_VALUE\fR> 
[\fI--env-file\fR <\fIFILE\fR>|\fI--input-file\fR <\fIFILE\fR>] 
[\fI--output-file\fR <\fIFILE\fR>] 
[\fI--remove-doubles\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmkdotenv\fR command allows users to add or update environment variables in a .env file. 
By default, it modifies the current \fB.env\fR file. You can optionally specify input and output files. 

It supports removing duplicate variable declarations while preserving the first occurrence.

.SH PIPE SUPPORT
To apply multiple updates or transformations sequentially, \fBmkdotenv\fR supports reading from standard input and writing to standard output.  
Use \fB--output-file=-\fR to stream to stdout, and pipe the result into another \fBmkdotenv\fR invocation. This enables flexible, chainable modification workflows.

.SH REQUIRED ARGUMENTS
.TP
.B --variable-name, -variable-name
The name of the environment variable to be added or updated.
.TP
.B --variable-value, -variable-value
The value assigned to the \fIVARIABLE_NAME\fR.

.SH OPTIONAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help, -h
Display the help message and exit.
.TP
.B --version, -v
Display the application version and exit.
.TP
.B --env-file <file>, --input-file <file>
Specify the .env file to read from. Defaults to \fB.env\fR in the current directory.
.TP
.B --output-file <file>
Write the modified contents to the specified file. Use \fB-\fR to write to standard output.
.TP
.B --remove-doubles
Remove duplicate variable entries from the file, keeping only the first occurrence.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Add a variable to the default .env file:
.RS
$ mkdotenv --variable-name API_KEY --variable-value 123456
.RE

.TP
Add a variable to a specific file:
.RS
$ mkdotenv --variable-name API_KEY --variable-value 123456 --env-file config.env
.RE

.TP
Write the result to a different file:
.RS
$ mkdotenv --variable-name API_KEY --variable-value 123456 --output-file output.env
.RE

.TP
Remove duplicates while writing:
.RS
$ mkdotenv --variable-name API_KEY --variable-value 123456 --remove-doubles
.RE

.TP
Chain multiple updates using pipes (stream between commands with \fB--output-file=-\fR):
.RS
.nf
$ mkdotenv --variable-name DB_HOST --variable-value 127.0.0.1 --output-file=- \\
  | mkdotenv --variable-name DB_USER --variable-value maiuser --output-file=- \\
  | mkdotenv --variable-name DB_PASSWORD --variable-value XXXX --output-file=.env.production
.fi
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Desyllas Dimitrios.

.SH BUGS
Report issues at https://github.com/pc-magas/mkdotenv/issues

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dotenv (1)
